Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops and
to the agenda I'm joined by Doctor Wade Ellison.
He is Emeritus Professor in the Department of Physics
at the University of Oxford. He is the author
of several books including Nuclear is for Life, a
Cultural Revolution. And radiation and reason, the impact of
science on the culture of fear. And today we're,
we're going to start by talking about energy in
general, but then we'll move to talking about nuclear
energy in particular. So Doctor Ellison, welcome to the
show. It's a huge pleasure to everyone.
Thank you. I'm looking forward to it.
OK, so, uh, let's start by talking about energy
in general, as I mentioned. What is the connection
between energy and life?
Well, I think this goes right the way back,
uh. Life is about making choices, it's about being
able to do this or that, moving to have
control of your environment. And you need energy to
do anything. And in a, a world which is
increasingly seems to be chaotic, uh, the power of
natural science and its predictability is very comforting and
useful, uh, and that is what I have built
my uh my uh career on. Teaching and lecturing
and doing experiments at CERN places er and understanding
about energy and then teaching people in schools and
occasions like this, I hope. Mhm.
So, so in your work, I read about 4
energy revolutions that have occurred since life began on
Earth. Could you tell us about those 4 energy
revolutions and would there also be a 5th? And
if so, what would it be?
Well, I found it rather rewarding to think back
that when life began on Earth, of course, there
was only the sunlight and wind and rain, uh,
and they were weak and unreliable, uh, but that
is the only thing available, and in the winter.
Life had to stop, the plants dropped seeds, uh,
and they were ready for the next year or
they lost their leaves and uh so. At the
very beginning, possibly between 3 and 1000 million years
ago, uh it was uh sunlight and wind and
rain, uh, with all their seasonal and daily uh
uh variations and, um. That of course continues today,
and those are what we call renewables. And then,
The next revolution came not by anything that we
did, but what nature found by evolution, and that
is the amazing ability to carry energy around with
you. In your own body, that is to say,
the whole food and digestive system, and this was
the animal period, and animals and fish and birds,
um, and, and this was a a a a
a huge step forward because uh the animals could
move from one place to another, according to the
season, uh and uh they learnt to survive. Um,
BUT still, each animal, each individual was limited in
its energy to what it could get from its
own food and digestive system, um. And so the
3rd revolution came with the ability to use energy
outside from outside your body. And this, well there
were two parts to this. The most important part,
I think, was communication. Individuals managed learned to communicate
with one another, to organize, uh, to, uh, to,
to, to, to make teams of oxygen, oxen and
slaves and horses, uh, and so on to. To
get energy beyond what one individual can do. Uh,
AND this was immensely, uh, powerful, and only humans
managed to do this. Now fire was an important
part of that, uh. That Turk revolution, but only
part. And then came the industrial revolution. Uh, AND
in the industrial revolution. We learnt to turn. Uh,
TO make energy work, it was the invention of
the engine. Uh, AND this was, um, this was
an extra extraordinary advance and as we know this
happened about 250 years ago, uh, it's, it was.
Uh, uh, uh, A revolution not only of engines,
but of fossil fuels which provided the energy for
uh those engines. Answers a question. A scientific question
is where is the energy. In the lump of
coal. Now, the official answer is chemistry, but that,
that's just giving it a name. Uh, THERE are
no springs and weights, uh, and so on in
a lump of coal. You can't, you can't see
where the energy is. Uh, AND it wasn't until
1924, exactly 101 years ago now, that a young
French er er er student, uh, who got the
Nobel Prize for it, uh, showed that in fact
it was the. The motion of electrons inside atoms
and molecules, which was responsible for the energy of
fossil fuels and incidentally, for the energy of food
uh and uh much uh much else beside, and
electronics and so on. And the physics of this
is quantum mechanics, but we learned to use it,
we learnt to use it before we knew what
was in fact going on. But quantum mechanists like
A musical instrument, an electron trapped inside an atom
is like a, a wind instrument. The smaller the
instrument, the higher the pitch. And it's because atoms
are very small that the energies are very high,
uh, like a small musical instrument. Uh, AND. This
development of this went on and gave us electronics
and so on, and that is what I call
er the industrial revolution and the modern economy. But
were in trouble Because we're in trouble because of
fossil fuels and their possible connection with climate change,
it certainly didn't make things better, er er they
certainly cause pollution, er and smogs and disease and
so on. So we are on the threshold of
the 5th revolution. And actually this isn't isn't anything
new, it's the same quantum argument. But this time
with a much smaller resonant cavity, a much smaller
musical instrument, where the what's in the waves inside
the musical instrument are not electrons in atoms, but
protons and neutrons inside the nucleus. And because the
nucleus of an atom is 100,000 times smaller than
the atom. Its energy is 2 million times greater.
And The marvel. Well, one marvel of quantum of
uh nuclear is that it is so energetic, er
and the other is that it is incredibly safe,
but we'll get to that in a moment. Uh,
IT'S. Uh, THIS has been going on for some
time. It's interesting to read that in 1931. Uh,
Churchill, Winston Churchill, writing in the Strand Magazine wrote,
the coal a man can get in a day
can easily do 500 times as much work as
the man himself. Nuclear energy, as at least 1
million times more powerful still. The discovery and control
of such sources of power would cause changes in
human affairs incomparably greater than those produced by the
steam engine 4 generations ago. Now that is the
threshold that he saw then and we are still
looking at it because we're frightened by it. Uh,
SO that is the 5th revolution. In fact, the
industrial revolution, if you like it, was, uh, the,
uh, where the analog effort was provided by engines
with energy from fossil fuels, and the nuclear revolution
is a digital, uh, the digital effort is provided
by AI powered by nuclear fission. That's where we're
going, dare we go there? Uh, MANY people don't.
I'm disappointed to see that Portugal hasn't er made
this jump yet, but we've all got to.
And so just to make perhaps this point a
little bit clearer, how important is energy for human
society?
Well, it's not the only thing I think. The
other thing we, as we all know, is trust
and confidence. This business being able to talk to
one another is only part of the problem. We've
got to trust one another, and we've only got
to look at what's going on in the States
at the moment to realize that that's not a
very easy problem, um, uh, so. Trust, trust and
confidence and energy are what is needed to power
a society, and then you can have activity, economic
productivity, growth, er and today, Here's another problem with
a rapidly falling birth rate around the world. Everybody
getting older, you need the new energy to do
more, not only to do the mechanical work with
the industrial revolution engines, but also to do the
digital work with AI.
And how do the kinds of energy that we
use relate to climate change?
Well, the quick answer to that is we don't
know. Uh, The climate is affected by so many
things. It is certainly true that the composition of
the atmosphere is changing, and it's changing every year
as we put more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
Um, ON the other hand, uh, There are many
things that affect the climate, and a few volcanoes,
which are certainly nothing to do with our what
we do on Earth, uh, can throw a few
cubic miles of, of, uh, Of material into the
atmosphere and we can have a uh a freeze
up for a couple of years with no harvests
and so on, like, in fact, happened in 1816
and in fact happens on a lesser scale, uh
so it's not, it's not only what we do,
but what we do is probably doesn't uh necessarily
help. What is important is that we look after
our environment for not only for ourselves but for
the other animals uh in on on Earth, because
by the time we know all about this, it'll
probably be too late to go back er and
uh rerun it all. The climate is unstable, it.
Changes anyway, and it has been changing with or
without us, without us, without us, and we should
prepare for change, as I said, they, uh, in
the first revolution, when life depended simply on sunshine
uh and wind and rain, uh, The animals wanted
to get shelter, they wanted to get out of
the weather, they wanted the squirrels wanted a store
of nuts, they wanted to be able to get
energy and life, which did not depend on the
weather. So uh we need to be prepared to
avoid the weather.
Mhm. So I would like to get now into
the topic of nuclear energy specifically and also to
probably address some common misconceptions that people have about
it. So, what is nuclear energy? What does it
involve?
Well, It involves the nuclei of atoms. Now, unfortunately,
it's very difficult to draw a picture of an
atom. The problem is that the nucleus is 100,000
times smaller than the atom itself, and the electrons,
which are the rest of the atom, are. Well
they get drawn as little circles going, but that
isn't what they look like at all. Uh, THEY
look like a fog of uh what the these
waves, in fact, the of, uh, uh, in the
atom. So the question is, where does nuclear get
the energy from? Well, 3 kinds of things can
happen, which could release energy from different states of
of protons and neutrons inside nuclei. First of all,
nuclei could hit one another. Now that's what happens
if you look at a candle flame, uh, the,
uh, in the region where the gasses are hot.
The oxygen and the fuel from the candle uh.
Collide with one another and they relax and relax
uh they release the energy and you get light
and heat and so on. Now that doesn't happen,
it cannot happen with nuclei because they are so
so small. And so highly charged that they're prevented
from ever getting near one another, so no two
nuclei ever hit one another, except in the center
of the sun once every billion years, uh, and
of course you can do it in uh in
uh uh uh one by one in experiments at
in laboratories like at CERN. So we know all
about it, but it just doesn't happen, so nuclei
are celibate, they do not release energy by er
hitting one another. So that is the makes it
incredibly safe, and that is why, in spite of
the fact that nuclear energy is so powerful, we
didn't know about it at all until uh uh
uh uh the late 1890s. The next thing that
can happen. Which does release energy, is that neutrons,
which are particles, which were only discovered in 1932,
um, because they're neutral, they can get through this
electric field and they can, they can hit the
nuclei of atoms, uh, and with. Certain kinds of
fuel, uranium and thorium, but not much else, uh,
with a neutron, you can uh have a reaction
and release energy. Now neutrons are unstable, they're rapidly
absorbed by almost all materials, so that's easily controlled.
For instance, everybody talks about Fukushima, well, for instance,
all the nuclear reactors in Japan shut down immediately
the earthquake happened. And there were no more neutrons
and no more new nuclear energy, the moment the
earthquake happened, long, long before the the tsunami arrived.
Well, about 20 minutes before the tuna you arrived,
so. That is again an extremely safe uh um.
Uh, uh, SITUATION. The only problem is that nuclear
reactor, nuclear reactions with, with neutrons fission leaves embers.
They're, they're like, uh, the glowing embers of a
fire. Uh, THIS is what we call radioactivity, and
these remnants emit radiation. And as Mary Curie discovered
when she first did experiments on these in 1900.
They're not affected by this, this decay, it's not
affected by anything. No, not by temperature, you can't
put it out, you can't start it, you can't
do anything. So uh what you have to do
is cool these embers to prevent them uh melting
uh things and uh uh releasing, but er so
radioactivity and radiation is. A problem that we have
to describe what happens, uh, it actually has only
about 10% of the energy of the nuclear fission,
so it's not so powerful, but uh, Nuclear radioactivity
is present in rocks, in our own body, uh,
in your own body, in the in every second,
about 7000 radioactive atoms decay. Now, uh. Life has
always been like that. If biology hadn't uh found
a way of protecting against that, we wouldn't be
here. So small amounts of radioactivity do no harm,
um, and uh they're all all around us. The
important thing about radioactivity and radiation is it's not
contagious. It's not like a disease. You can't catch
it. Uh, YOU can't spread it like a flame.
Um, Uh, AND this is very important, for instance,
after, uh, uh, uh, an accident like at Fukushima,
where some people have been, uh, uh, had, uh,
contact with radiation. Hospitals and uh people, doctors. Uh,
Wouldn't treat people. They ran away from people who
had been radioactive. The first thing you should know
about radi radiation safety is you can't catch it,
so you can treat people, anybody who has been
affected and you won't get, you won't catch it.
It doesn't spread.
So yeah, uh just before we get more into
what you're mentioning there, let me ask you because
this is something that sometimes people establish a link
in their heads. Is there any link at all
between nuclear energy and nuclear weapons?
Uh, WELL, people like to, people like to run
away from this and say there isn't any connection.
Of course there is, it's, uh, the same energy,
but it's not the energy of the radioactivity and
the radiation. It's the energy of, of, uh, of
neutrons splitting atoms or in the case of the
sun, uh um in the center of the sun.
Nuclei hitting one another, and this doesn't, this doesn't
uh normally happen. What I mean is that what
happens in a nuclear, if you have a nuclear
explosion from a bomb, and there haven't been very
many with people involved, thank goodness, but uh at
Hiroshima and Nagasaki, there was a very high 100,000
who died. About the same number who died from
uh the bombing, uh with 1000 planes, um from
1000 planes with conventional bombs in Tokyo uh earlier
in 1945. In fact, the blast and the fire
of a nuclear weapon are just like the blast
and the fire of, TNT or other high explosive,
are very destructive, not at all good for life,
er er and they kill people, but by hitting
them or burning them, not by the radiation. In
fact, we know that the survivors of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki, uh, their health has been followed for, Uh,
ever since for 70 years, and we know how
many died of cancer and how many died of
cancer who were in other towns in Japan who
were similar and so on, and a comparison can
be made. How many extra people died of the
radiation from Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and the answer is
about 0.5%, slightly less than 0.5%. So the radiation,
in spite of all the, the fear mongering, the
radiation is not the problem with the nuclear weapon,
it's the blast and the fire. And uh I
I blot on fire in Gaza or uh or
um. Uh, Ukraine, uh, now we know how destructive,
uh, that can be.
So you mentioned briefly Fukushima and Chernobyl there. What
would you tell people who still worry about those
two incidents? Uh, I mean, what, what would be
your response to their anxiety about them?
Well, it goes back to, one of the things
it goes back to is what I said on
discussing the energy revolutions is when man discovered how
to. Uh, USE energy. He communicated, he taught his
children the dangers of fire. Don't touch that, it's
hot. It'll burn you. Every child learns that, usually
they, they do hurt themselves and they er and
their mother says, now you won't do that again,
will you? Uh. The problem with nuclear energy is
we have not been teaching the children about it
for the last 70 years, so if you go
into a school, you will not get told uh
the safety of nuclear energy and radiation, which I
have been talking about and which will say more
about. So ignorance and fear are very serious problems,
um. So in the case of Fukushima, nobody died
of radiation at all. Although it brought the world
almost to a stop for many years as far
as energy available concerned, at Chernobyl 28 people died
or who went in uh in a few weeks
after they, not of cancer, but they, uh, their
biology broke down uh and uh. There was, there
was no firm evidence of uh of cancer and
that all happened in a few weeks. Those are
the people who went in and fought the fire.
Uh NOW there have been intense study of whether
people died. What cancer at. Chernobyl, uh, and some
people have said maybe, and as time has gone
on, and there have been more and more studies,
it's clear that if you look, If you test
everybody for something, then you will find a few
people who you wouldn't have found anyway, and that
the mere fact of testing them uh causes uh
them to think that maybe they uh uh were
affected by the radiation and maybe they have have
uh. Uh, AN operation to cure it when maybe
there wasn't anything to cure. So it's very difficult,
uh, but, uh, we think that, in fact, it's
interesting there's a study, you know what I mean
by the placebo effect. The placebo effect is when
somebody is treated, sorry, someone's not treated, but they
think they have been treated and they get better.
I mean they really get better. Now, since the
reverse of that, if you tell somebody, you have
been irradiated, and they say, what does that mean?
And it says, well, don't worry, you don't have
to worry about that. There's a bus outside, pack
your case, uh and we're going to take you
away and you'll be paid compensation. Those people get
very frightened and it causes mental ill illness, uh,
that happened at Fukushima, er and at other accidents
too. People fear actually can make people sufferer and
think. They have symptoms, rather like the placebo effect
actually uh cures people when they haven't been told.
It's the philosophy of a medieval er er a
curse, um, but again, education is probably the best
way of getting over this sort of thing. So
the important thing about that to say to people
about Chernobyl and or Chernobyl, Chernobyl is the, the
uh uh Ukrainian. Um, SPELLING of the word incidentally,
uh, and it's in Ukraine, so nowadays I think
rather like we, we, we, we talk about Kiev
and not Kiev, uh, we should use the, the,
uh, Ukrainian word, um. We should tell people, look,
you are already protected against low levels of radiation,
er because that is the environment in which, Biology
evolved, so stop worrying. Uh, IF you read. Don't
read murder mysteries if they upset you. You don't
need the murder mysteries.
OK, and I think that you've already partly answered
this question, but what would you tell people about
the risks of ionizing radiation?
Well, as I say, for, for the, you're naturally
protected. Uh, BY quite high exposures to radiation and
Already in 1934. So, uh, this is before World
War 2, after Churchill, just after Churchill, just after
the discovery of the neutron, uh, There was an
international uh meeting of world authorities on radiation, and
they agreed what was safe. And there is nothing,
there there's a lot more data now, uh, but.
The the the they got it right. The number
that they gave got it right. Unfortunately, for political
reasons, that has been exaggerated by a factor of
between 500 and 1000 now in order to frighten
people, cos cos if you're in the war, if
you're in the military business, it's beneficial if you
can frighten the enemy about your weapons without actually
using them or even without making them. Uh, I
mean, Reagan, uh, uh, um, had a whole campaign
called Star Wars. Well, scientifically that was based, that
was not, uh, that was not based on good
science, but the Russians were terrified of it, and
it was, it was part of the collapse of
the, of the Soviet Union. So politically, there is
reason. To make people frightened of nuclear even when
it uh when it isn't, um. So Uh, people
should understand that. One of what has happened since
1934, and every year, amongst the Nobel Prizes for
uh uh medicine and physics and chemistry and so
on, is somebody who's, Unscrambled one of the mechanisms
for protecting life from the effects of radiation, and
what happens is because our life is made, we're
made up lots and lots of cells, many of
which are interchangeable. So if one of them goes
out of action, uh, you've got the other ones,
uh, they come up the biology comes along and
either repairs or. Or the uh the places that
the cells and the DNA uh and so on,
and it's brilliant, um, it's it's not physics, it's
uh, It's, it's biology, and I, I started a,
a course on on uh on medical physics at
at Oxford, which was very successful, got the students,
physics students going up to the uh hospitals to
do uh experiments and see how uh uh mathematics
is really useful in helping people in bedroom uh
slippers. But um the uh the things that people
should see are the uh. Wildlife videos of, of
uh of the animals in the, Chernobyl evacuation zone,
which are now thriving. Uh, IT'S a wildlife park.
Uh, THEY'RE just so glad that they've got rid
of those humans that are, were, uh, occupying their
space, and now they have the place to themselves.
So, uh, I would recommend looking at the BBC
National Geographic, there are lot lots of of them
uh which show uh beautiful of uh.
So let me ask you now then, how does
renewable energy compared to nuclear energy? What are the
pros and cons of each of them?
Well, renewable energy. You don't have to know anything.
You can see it, you can feel it, and
so everybody likes it, and there's no denying that.
And as I say you, even with a lump
of coal, you can't see the energy and you
certainly can't see it from a lump of uranium.
It's it's it's invisible. So the fact that it's
visible and you can see it and feel it
er is. A very strong argument in favor of
it. Uh, AGAINST nuclear, uh. Its benefits are not
It doesn't get taught in schools or jolly well
ought to be. The media, people who go into
the media and politicians are not included in the
small number of people who do understand a little
bit about it, uh, and the net result is
that you open the newspaper and everybody's afraid, uh,
and they don't want to know, and I mean,
Fukushima provided wonderful. Uh, MATERIAL for the media for
exciting, uh, uh, uh, pictures, um, of, uh, of,
of tsunami waves and hydrogen explosions and so on,
which weren't nuclear, they were chemical, um, uh. And
they didn't want to go give up on those
and uh last year I was out in South
Korea uh lecturing because people are still frightened of
the cooling water from Fukushima 1011 years after the,
um, after the accident, um, so. That's what's against
nuclear, uh. What's against renewable is that is very
low energy density, uh, there's very little energy there,
uh. Nuclear is a million times more powerful than
coal, but coal is 1000 times more powerful than
uh than than wind. I mean, if I had
a blackboard torn out and a couple of lines,
I'll show you with uh student, student uh physics,
just why the energy is so low in uh
in um. In renewables and so much higher in.
Fossil fuels and so much, much higher in uh
so this is not, this is not technology, this
is fundamental physics. Uh, So But there are other
problems with renewables, and that is that they are
unreliable and intermittent, it's the weather problem again, uh,
they're vulnerable. Uh, Extremes of weather and terrorists can
easily knock out er renewables in the way that
they can't knock out nuclear, um. Very often Renewable
sources of energy are hundreds of miles away from
where people live, so you have very expensive, uh,
Grid lines to carry the energy, uh, and that's
all unnecessary. You want sources of energy which are
available where people live and where the industry is
and when it's wanted. Uh, Renewable plants, farms. It's
a bit awful the way they're called farms, that's
just salesmanship by the, uh, that they should be
called industries, um, uh, solar, solar farms is a,
it's not, it's not a farm, uh, it's the
opposite of a farm. But they only last for
20 years at best, whereas nuclear lasts for 60
and 80 years, so there's a. When it comes
to cost, uh, and I'm not gonna talk about
that at length, but that's a whole subject in
itself, full of misunderstandings, er, which, uh, and the
misunderstandings are expensive, um. So Uh, Renewables are large.
Uh, AND. Uh, There's a lot of stuff. That
has to would have to be decommissioned every 20
years, and nobody can tell you what they're going
to do with it. Then there's nuclear. What is
pro about nuclear is the energy density uh and
the reliability. And the fact that it's in principle
available all the time, it's only available for a
few weeks in the year when the fuel has
to be changed, but actually that is getting better.
I mean, for instance, when the, even when the
first nuclear submarine was launched in 1955. Think how
long time that ago that was, it had enough
fuel in it to power it for uh the
lifetime of the submarine. So the, the ships that
are being designed now, which are nuclear powered, will
never have to be fueled refueled because uh they'll
be able to go at 30 knots of speed
for 30 years without any change of fuel. Um,
The what the waste. The waste, so-called waste, first
of all, a lot of it is not burnt,
only about 2 or 3% of the fuel has
been used. And the rest includes uh um elements,
medical isotopes, which can be used, for instance, in
every fire, smoke alarm, uh probably uh above your
head. Now I don't know if you've got a
smoke alarm there, that's got an americium 241 uh
radioactive source in it. And interestingly enough, it signals,
it goes off and signals fire when the radiation
from the uh americium 241 is not detected by
the uh because it's absorbed by the smoke. So
uh we've got radioactivity all around us, but people
don't like to talk about it cos then they
wouldn't buy it. Uh, SO, um. Also for nuclear
er. The enormous amount of heat that is also
generated can be used for uh district heating, for
heating homes, as this is in addition to creating
electricity. um, AND in China now and also in
the, in Scandinavia where they er have uh such
district heating already um there is uh. The uh
piping, uh, waste heat, hot water, uh, around from
the plant. You don't get that from a windmill.
Um, YOU can have process heat, you can make
hydrogen and chemical feedstuffs, uh, and so on for,
uh, for, for industry, so the whole industry could
be built round, uh, and even. Uh, CAN grow
food based on the energy from a, a nuclear
plant, but I won't go into that. I've probably
been long enough I answered this question already.
So, uh, you've talked a little bit about waste
there. People, of course, sometimes also worry about how
nuclear waste is handled. Could you tell us about
how we deal with it and whether it is
risky in any way?
Well, It is emitting radiation. It is not going
to explode. But it it is emitting radiation and
you can't stop it emitting radiation until it's died
down, uh, so that's the problem. First thing is
because, Nuclear fuel, you need so little fuel nuclear
fuel because of the factor of a million. You
need a millionth of the amount of fuel compared
with coal, and you need um get a millionth
of the waste. So, uh, if you, for the
whole, all the energy for the whole of your
life. Uh, FOR one person, for their heating, their
transport, their food, uh, everything would be, could come
from 1 kg of uranium. Fully used Uh, and
so that. Will create 1 kg of nuclear waste.
Well, that's not very much. Um, SO you need
to put it behind a bit of concrete, bury
it in water, uh, uh, put it under water
for 5 to 10 years to cool it, because
when it's radioactive, it gets hot, uh, and it's
the heat, the byproduct of the heat, but it.
I mean a, a melt, a meltdown is people
talk about meltdown as if it was something catastrophic,
it's not, it's just uh uh it just, it
just melts and becomes rather difficult to deal with,
but it's not gonna do anything, um. For storing,
it can be vitrified, so it can be encased
in in er er in. In uh in glass,
uh stored on the surface, it can be buried,
but that's a bit of a silly thing to
do when you can think of all the things
you can do with the waste. Um, THE fission
products, there are two kinds of radioactivity in nuclear
waste. One are the. Where they uh. Nucleus is
all ready fission, and that's called fission products, and
they have a 30 year half life, which means
that the radiation has dropped by a factor of
a million of 600 years. So that, that's not
difficult to deal with. The longer products are like
the Mliium 241, uh, uh, they, they have a
longer, uh, or many of them have a much
longer lifetime of plutonium, it's a much longer lifetime,
um, and they do need to be uh uh
burnt up, um, but, uh. When I say they
have a much longer lifetime, it means they're much
less radioactive for longer, rather than being very radioactive
for a shorter time. Uh, SO, uh, there's what
there's a question of what happens to fishing products
and what happens to the um. Uh, TO the,
uh, uh, actinides as they're, they're called, like, like
plutonium, but none of those is a problem, they've
all been dealt with there's more than one kind
of solution, exactly which one will be preferred by
the marketplace uh is a is a matter of
uh economics, um, uh, and where you get the
fuel for the next reactors from. So, uh, nuclear
waste is. An educational problem like um uh many
things in this uh business.
So as we went through these topics surrounding nuclear
energy, we've also addressed some misconceptions about it, but
what do you think are the most common mis
misconceptions surrounding nuclear energy?
Well, one of the first things is To think
that this is something which is beyond your educational
pay grade, that it's something that's too difficult to
understand, that only experts can tell you. That's rubbish.
It's not difficult to understand, uh. If you don't
understand it, it might seem hard, but people should
study it. It's not difficult. It's no more difficult
than fire, which is a lot more dangerous. Second
thing is, there are a lot of bogus arguments
that have been introduced. For instance, E equals MC2
is nothing to do with nuclear energy. All energy.
Has a relationship between energy and mass which says
E equals MC2. If you take, if you take
a a ball and you drop it onto the
floor, when it's on the floor, it has less
energy than it had when you held it up
uh at shoulder height, and its mass will be
less. Because equals mc2 applies to everything. So it
just means that energy and mass go go together
uh in at CERN doing experiments in partic particle
physics, uh, doing this all the time, gosh, nothing
would work if, if uh if E equals MC2
was uh uh what the problem's about. So, uh,
that's bogus, um. The next thing is the idea
that. Something that is a little bit dangerous. If
you have more of it, it then it builds
up. Now, biology, because of the biology side of
it. Radiation and nuclear only become dangerous when it
goes above a certain level. When there is enough
uh biological agency to, to put the fire out,
to apply the corrections to, to manage it, there's
no, no uh risk at all. But unfortunately, a
radiation protection industry has built up and lots of
jobs and so on associated with it, where, where
she says well if you have a little bit
of energy, uh, have a 10% of the energy,
that's 11th of the of the risk. That's not
true. So it's a question of, it's like a
speed limit. Below the speed limit, uh, you may
have to look after old people crossing the road,
er um, and children, but it's generally safe. But
when the speed goes up, er, you shouldn't be
in the road, er, and they shouldn't be driving
that fast. So it's a matter of tolerances, good
old fashioned speed limits. As they found in 1934,
so we know we know what that is. So,
uh, Yeah, that, that's, so people should learn. And
we should be teaching our children. As we did
about fire, uh, uh, when we first brought fire
into the home a million years ago, that wouldn't
have worked if we didn't have the power to
educate people. Animals don't educate one another uh in
the way that humans do. And in the case
of nuclear, humans don't either.
And why do you think that so many environmentalists
seem to be against nuclear energy?
Well, Those A psychology of group membership, if somebody's
going to build a a a a a a
road near your house, uh, then you may join
other people er who sim have a uh a
similar thing and you. May get uh satisfaction from
being membership of a group who are have a
uh uh a particular concern, maybe it's a uh
a religious concern or it's a belief in a
particular, the importance of a particular kind of music
or something, so that's a group, Uh, psychology of
that goes into, of environmentalists looking at nuclear energy,
uh, you know, we're all against it, so, uh,
that's not them, each of them, uh, thinking about
it, that's groupthink, and groupthink doesn't, it's not logical.
Uh, SO, groups. Which have a certain remit. Don't
change their minds until the funds run out, er
and then they stopped, so Greenpeace of course by
now has a lot of money and they're not
going to change their mind, but many members of
Greenpeace have changed their minds and have made videos
and so on explaining why they've changed their minds,
but er still they. The Greenpeace corporate group uh
think uh carries on anyway, so. Um, Again, When
I wrote my first book, I er did get
a review from a, I think it was called
Peace News uh about anti-nuclear there. And To give
them their due, this review said, well, you, you
may not like where he ends up. But we
think you ought to read this book. Uh, AND,
uh, uh. So it can be done, and it's
about education and getting the message out.
So, and what would you say are the consequences
of not using nuclear energy or moving away from
it like uh Germany did, for example?
Well, Leaving nuclear energy out of it for a
moment. I think we've got, we're in trouble. All
politicians talk about growth. But the growth can either
come from more people doing the same amount of
work or er. Um, Or smaller number of people
doing more work, but if the number of people
is going down and they're getting older, there are
going to be less people doing less work and
uh more people on social security and more people
drawing pensions and so on, so uh. The reason,
and then there is the, the um. The the
climate change concern, so. Everything's coming together to suggest
that and AI is appearing, so everything's coming together
to suggest that we are pressing, we are on
the edge of a of a a revolution and
it's coming from many directions. Now, er, Germany, of
course. Decided against nuclear and it would go back.
To renewables, which are weather dependent. Now the whole
of this story can be described as how to
get away from the weather. Um, GOING right, right
back to the plants who were forced to, to,
uh, uh, drop their existence as seeds for the
following, um. Uh, SEASON. Um, Now, France and Norway
and uh and uh Canada and others. Not often
enough, UK, never Portugal, er um have not uh
grasped this um problem properly, so it's not just
about electricity, it's about much more than that, and
in particular it's about supplying the electricity, the energy.
Where people live, not putting nuclear plants uh out
of sight, out of mind, hundreds of miles away.
That was done in the UK and in America,
so for defense reasons, because people thought it was
dangerous and secret and all the rest of it.
There's nothing secret about about uh nuclear, um, that's
part of people's uh dramatic thinking. Um, So I
think we are heading for an economic implosion, an
industrial collapse, high energy prices, political friction with neighbors,
uh. Um, THE problems between Germany, er, and Norway,
er, and Denmark and Sweden, they're not prepared to
send electricity to Germany because the, uh, Germany's shut
down all their nuclear power plants, and people are
getting angry about becoming a political problem. So I
think This big change coming.
So I, I have one last question then. Do
you think that it would be possible to rehabilitate
how our culture deals with nuclear energy and make
people more welcoming of it? And if so, how?
Yes, it's possible. It's not going to be on
the timescale that most politicians would like, which is
5 years, which is their span, uh, it's going
to take a generation, it's going to be like
persuading people to smoke less. Uh, IT'S a cultural
change, and it's going to take 20 years for
it to be complete. It's also true that the
technology is developing more cheaply and meaningfully, uh, and
so on, so that we can have these small
reactors, and I haven't been talking about that, uh,
but there's going to be more different kinds of
it. It's rather like. Uh, AT the end of
the 19th century when people were told that there
were going to be engines on the roads, and
they imagined, uh, steam huge steam trains coming down
and they said that's going to frighten the horses,
er and er I'm voting against it. Well, uh,
in fact, The what came along then, principally from
France and Germany were little cars, which were, everybody
had one. They're not not great big steam trains,
things can be much, significantly smaller, significantly local er
and er. If you have for 100,000 people, one
nuclear reactor, uh, then the children at school can
go on school visits to see it, then maybe
their uncle works there, uh, they go to parties,
and they have er er um festivals there and
they'll get some. Uh, OWNERSHIP of this, so it's
not something that comes from outside your region, it's,
you say we have our nuclear power station, and
that is what we rely on, and the Russians
or anybody else are going to, even Mr. Trump,
they're not gonna take it away from us. So
uh um there's a. Social identification of smaller units.
Um, And this will reduce. Megawatt miles, I mean
they, it, it costs money, uh, and loses energy
to transmit energy over long distances, it's ridiculous, um.
But mostly it's about education and it's about uh
getting children in schools to take er smoke detectors
apart and see the radiation symbol on the uh
the smoke detector which you can buy very cheaply
uh and be taught how it works, um. There
are other things we've got to do. WHICH are
more difficult. There is a whole. A culture of.
Um, COMMITTEES and safety procedures and laws and regulations
which have got to be, uh, taken down. They
are not based on science, they're based on fear.
Uh, AND it's difficult to know how to do
that because you have to, to take them down,
you've also got to deal with the fear first,
and so that's why it's not going to take
er er some time. But in the end, electricity
should be cheap. There's no shortage of nuclear fuel.
Uranium dissolves in seawater in water, it's soluble. So
you actually to mine it, you can pump er
water down a mine uh and pump it back
out again, uh and you don't have to have
people er digging, er down there. So, uh, the
extraction of uranium and since it's. It does invoke
it uh. Dissolves in water, the sea is full
of uranium. Uh, AND it's not far, it's only
a factor of 2 or 3 away from being.
Commercially sensible to make uranium to get uranium from
seawater. So there's no shortage of of uh of
uranium. So, I think. That, well, my grandchildren are
already er er here, um, but my great grandchildren
and great great grandchildren will think that electricity is
cheap. And essential, rather like water and clean water
and clean air, uh, just saying they are too
cheap to meter doesn't mean to say they're not
important. Air and clean water are extremely important, and
electricity should be the same.
Great. So, Doctor Ellison, thank you very much for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been a very informative conversation. Thank you. Hi guys,
thank you for watching this interview until the end.
If you liked it, please share it, leave a
like and hit the subscription button. The show is
brought to you by Nights Learning and Development done
differently, check their website at Nights.com and also please
consider supporting the show on Patreon or PayPal. I
would also like to give a huge thank you
to my main patrons and PayPal supporters Perergo Larsson,
Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf, Alex Adam
Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika Lenny,
John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Mari Robert
Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz, Mark Smith,
Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan Wilson, asilla
dearauurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick Punter Darusmani Charlotte
blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary Galman
Sam of Zallidrianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall
Edin Bronner, Douglas Free Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteseus Slelitsky,
Scott Zacharyish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel Friedman,
William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris
Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists,
Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey,
then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas
radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry,
Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas
Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate
van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali
Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers. These are Webb, Jim,
Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict
Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo
Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.